


MAILP(1)                 USER COMMANDS                   MAILP(1)



NAME
     mailp - frontend to the mp PostScript pretty printer

SYNOPSIS
     mailp [ options] file ...

     newsp [ options] file ...

     digestp [ options] file ...

     filep [ options] file ...

     filofaxp [ options] file ...

     franklinp [ options] file ...

     timemanp [ options] file ...

     timesysp [ options] file ...

DESCRIPTION
     mailp is a frontend to the mp PostScript pretty printer pro-
     gram. It uses different names to provide various mp options:

     mailp will print out mail messages.

     newsp will print out USENET news articles.

     digestp will print out USENET digest files.

     filep will print out ordinary ASCII files.

     filofaxp will print out in Filofax personal  organiser  for-
     mat.

     franklinp  will  print  out  in  Franklin  Planner  personal
     organiser format.

     timemanp will print out in Time Manager  personal  organiser
     format.

     timesysp will print out in  Time/System  International  per-
     sonal organiser format.

     mailp (and the associated programs) read  each  filename  in
     sequence  and  generate a prettified version of the contents
     in PostScript format. If no filename arguments are provided,
     mailp reads the standard input.

     mailp uses the PRINTER  environment  variable  to  determine
     which  printer the output from the mp program is sent to. If
     this environment variable is not found, then it defaults  to



Sun Release 4.1   Last change: 17 February 1992                 1






MAILP(1)                 USER COMMANDS                   MAILP(1)



     the ps printer.

OPTIONS
     -F   Instead of printing who the mail article  is  for,  the
          top header will contain who the mail article is from. A
          useful  option  for  people  with  their  own  personal
          printer.

     -Pprinter
          Send output to the named printer. Otherwise send output
          to  the  printer named in the PRINTER environment vari-
          able.

     -h   Banner printing is disabled. Most  of  the  information
          that typically appears on the banner sheet is output in
          the mp banners.

     -dprinter
          Send output to the named printer. Otherwise send output
          to  the  printer named in the PRINTER environment vari-
          able.

     -l   Format output in landscape mode.   Two  pages  of  text
          will be printed per sheet of paper.

     -s subject
          Use  subject as the new subject for  the  printout.  If
          you  are  printing ordinary ASCII files which have been
          specified on the command line, the subject will default
          to the name of each of these files.

SEE ALSO
     mp(1)

AUTHORS
     Original version by Bruno Pillard - October 1988.

     Modified by Rich Burridge - June 1989 and October 1990.

     Revisted by Larry W. Virden - August, September 1990.

     Revisited by Bruno Pillard - September 1990.

     Revisited by David W. Sanderson - August 1991.











Sun Release 4.1   Last change: 17 February 1992                 2



